



RAW                                                         F. Theoleyre
Internet-Draft                                                      CNRS
Intended status: Standards Track                         G. Papadopoulos
Expires: January 3, 2020                                  IMT Atlantique
                                                            July 2, 2019


   Operations, Administration and Maintenance (OAM) features for RAW
                   draft-theoleyre-raw-oam-support-00

Abstract

   The wireless medium presents significant specific challenges to
   achieve properties similar to those of wired deterministic networks.
   At the same time, a number of use cases cannot be solved with wires
   and justify the extra effort of going wireless.  This document
   presents some of these use-cases.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at https://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on January 3, 2020.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2019 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (https://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of




Theoleyre & Papadopoulos Expires January 3, 2020                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft            OAM features for RAW                 July 2019


   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   2
     1.1.  Terminology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
   2.  OAM to provision appropriately the resources  . . . . . . . .   3
   3.  Operation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
   4.  Administration  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
     4.1.  Energy efficiency requirements  . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
   5.  Maintenance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
   6.  Informative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
   Authors' Addresses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5

1.  Introduction

   RAW (Reliable and Available Wireless) is an effort to provide
   deterministic behavior over a network that includes a wireless
   physical layer.  Enabling the wireless communication reliable and
   available is even more challenging than it is with wires, due to the
   numerous causes of loss in transmission that add up to the congestion
   losses and the delays caused by overbooked shared resources.  To
   provide quality of service along a multihop path that is composed of
   wired and wireless hops, additional methods needs to be considered to
   leverage the potential lossy wireless communication.

   Traceability belongs to Operations, Administration, and Maintenance
   (OAM) which is the toolset for fault detection and isolation, and for
   performance measurement.  More can be found on OAM Tools in .

   The main purpose of this document is to details the requirements of
   the OAM features recommended to construct a predictable communication
   infrastructure on top of a collection of wireless networks.  In
   particular, we expect to provide packet loss evaluation, self-testing
   and automated adaptation to enable trade-offs between resilience and
   energy consumption.

   This document describes the benefits, problems, and trade-offs for
   using OAM in wireless networks to provide availability and
   predictability.

   In this document, the term OAM will be used according to its
   definition specified in [RFC6291].  We expect to implement an OAM
   framework in RAW networks to maintain a real-time view of the network
   infrastructure, and its ability to respect the Service Level
   Agreements (delay, reliability) assigned to each data flow.




Theoleyre & Papadopoulos Expires January 3, 2020                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft            OAM features for RAW                 July 2019


1.1.  Terminology

   o  OAM entity: a data flow to be controled;

   o  OAM end-devices: the source or destination of a data flow;

   o  defect: a temporary change in the network characteristics (e.g.
      link quality degradation because of temporary external
      interference, a mobile obstacle)

   o  fault: a definite change which may affect the network performance,
      e.g. a node runs out of energy,

2.  OAM to provision appropriately the resources

   RAW networks expect to make the communications predictable on top of
   a wireless network infrastructure.  Most critical applications will
   define a Service Level Agreeemnt to respect for the data flows it
   generates.  Thus, the wireless networks have to be dimensionned to
   respect these SLAs.

   To respect strict guarantees, RAW relies on a PCE which has to
   schedule the transmissions in the different wireless networks.  Thus,
   resources have to be provisionned to handle any defect.  OAM
   represents the core of the overprovisonning process, and maintains
   the network operational by updating the schedule dynmically.

   Fault-tolerance also assumes that multiple path have to be
   provisionned so that an end-to-end circuit keeps on existing whatever
   the conditions.  OAM is in charge of controling the recplication/
   process

   To be energy-efficient, reserving some dedicated out-of-band
   resources for OAM seems ireealistic, and only in-band solutions are
   considered here.

3.  Operation

4.  Administration

   To take proper decisions, the network has to expose a collection of
   metrics

   o  Packet losses: the time-window average and maximum values of the
      number of packet losses has to be measured.  Many critical
      applications stop to work if a few consecutive packets are
      dropped;




Theoleyre & Papadopoulos Expires January 3, 2020                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft            OAM features for RAW                 July 2019


   o  Received Signal Strength Indicator (RSSI) is a very common metric
      in wireless to denote the link quality.  The radio chipset is in
      charge of translating a received signal strngth into a normalized
      quality indicator;

   o  Delay: the time elapsed between a packet generation / enqueuing
      and its reception by the destination;

   These metrics should be collected:

   o  per virtual circuit to measure the end-to-end performance for a
      given flow.  Each of the paths has to be isolated in multipath
      strategies;

   o  per radio channel to measure e.g. the level of external
      interfence, and to be able to apply counter-measures (e.g.
      blacklisting)

   o  per device to detect misbehaving node, when it relays the packets
      of several flows.

4.1.  Energy efficiency requirements

   RAW targets also low-power wireless networks, where energy represents
   a key constraint.  Thus, we have to cake care of the energy and
   bandwidth consumption.  The following techniques aim to reduce the
   cost of such maintenance:

      piggybacking: some control information has inserted in the data
      packets if they don't fragment the packet (i.e. the MTU is not
      exceeded).  Information Elements represent a standardized way to
      handle such information;

      flags/fields: we have to set-up flags in the packets to monitor to
      be able to monitor them accurately.  A sequence number field may
      help to detect packet losses.  Similarly, path inference tools
      such as [ipath] insert additionnal information in the headers to
      identify the path followed by a packet a posteriori.

5.  Maintenance

6.  Informative References

   [ipath]    Gao, Y., Dong, W., Chen, C., Bu, J., Wu, W., and X. Liu,
              "iPath: path inference in wireless sensor networks.",
              2016, <https://doi.org/10.1109/TNET.2014.2371459>.





Theoleyre & Papadopoulos Expires January 3, 2020                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft            OAM features for RAW                 July 2019


   [RFC6291]  Andersson, L., van Helvoort, H., Bonica, R., Romascanu,
              D., and S. Mansfield, "Guidelines for the Use of the "OAM"
              Acronym in the IETF", BCP 161, RFC 6291,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC6291, June 2011,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc6291>.

Authors' Addresses

   Fabrice Theoleyre
   CNRS
   Building B
   300 boulevard Sebastien Brant - CS 10413
   Illkirch  67400
   FRANCE

   Phone: +33 368 85 45 33
   Email: theoleyre@unistra.fr


   Georgios Z. Papadopoulos
   IMT Atlantique
   Office B00 - 102A
   2 Rue de la Chataigneraie
   Cesson-Sevigne - Rennes  35510
   FRANCE

   Phone: +33 299 12 70 04
   Email: georgios.papadopoulos@imt-atlantique.fr























Theoleyre & Papadopoulos Expires January 3, 2020                [Page 5]
